Ilariae/executor reorg (#753)
wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs: protocol/infrastructure/relayers/executor-framework.md

---
title: Executor Framework
description: Learn how the Executor framework enables permissionless cross-chain message execution using on-chain contracts and off-chain providers.
categories: Basics, Executor, Relayers
---

# Executor Framework

The Executor is a shared execution framework that delivers Wormhole messages across chains. It standardizes how message execution is requested, quoted, and performed, enabling any service or protocol to execute messages permissionlessly through on-chain contracts.

> The Executor framework enables anyone to act as a relayer within a permissionless network that uses a request-and-quote model for delivering messages. Instead of relying on a single, centralized relayer service, the Executor framework creates an open marketplace where multiple providers can compete to deliver messages based on signed execution quotes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Executor framework enables anyone to act as a relayer in a permissionless network that uses a request-and-quote model for message delivery. Instead of relying on a single, centralized relayer service, the Executor framework creates an open marketplace where multiple providers can compete to deliver messages based on signed execution quotes.
```

## Architecture and Components

The Executor framework separates responsibilities between three independent participants:

| Actor	            | Responsibility                                                              | 
|-------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------| 
| Integrator        | Creates and submits execution requests using valid quotes.                  | 
| Executor Contract | Publishes requests, transfers payment, and emits observable events.         | 
| Relay Provider	| Monitors events, issues and validates signed quotes, and executes messages. | 

This modular structure enables permissionless, verifiable, and cost-efficient message execution across multiple blockchains — without persistent on-chain state or protocol-specific relayers.

> The Executor framework is composed of a small set of on-chain and off-chain components that work together to request, quote, and execute cross-chain messages. The following components define the roles, interfaces, and data structures involved in the execution process.

Author: this is in a mermaid flow so it's capitalized as every other item

> The Executor framework is composed of a small set of on-chain and off-chain components that work together to request, quote, and execute cross-chain messages. The following components define the roles, interfaces, and data structures involved in the execution process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Executor framework comprises a small set of on-chain and off-chain components that work together to request, quote, and execute cross-chain messages. The following components define the roles, interfaces, and data structures involved in the execution process.
```

- **Relay Provider**: An off-chain party responsible for performing message execution between chains. 
- **[Executor contract](/docs/products/reference/executor-addresses/){target=\_blank}**: The shared on-chain contract or program used to make execution requests. 
- **Execution Quote**: A signed quote defining cost and parameters for execution between a source and destination chain. 

> - **Execution Request**: A request generated on-chain or off-chain for a given message (e.g., NTT, VAA v1, etc.) to be executed on another chain. 

Reviewer: Do these need to be capitalized? I know Relay Provider was discussed and needs to be, but just figured I'd flag this and you could verify. Thanks!

- **No payment enforcement**: The contract does not check that the payment matches the quoted fee; providers enforce this off-chain.

This minimal design keeps the contract generic, inexpensive, and compatible with multiple message formats and future Wormhole protocols.

## Relay Provider

A Relay Provider is an off-chain service that executes messages between chains and operates a Quoter service to issue signed execution quotes. Providers compete in a permissionless marketplace by offering signed execution quotes that define their pricing and delivery terms. This system decentralizes message delivery, allowing integrators to choose providers or run their own, rather than relying on a single relayer service. 

Each provider runs infrastructure that listens for execution requests emitted by the Executor contract on supported chains. When a request matches one of their quotes, the provider retrieves the associated VAA from the Guardians and performs the message execution on the destination chain.  

Each Relay Provider operates a Quoter service that issues signed quotes and defines execution terms. 

Each quote specifies: 

- The source and destination chains. 
- Pricing. 

> - An expiry time before which the Executor contract can accept the quote. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The source and destination chains
- Pricing
- An expiry time before which the Executor contract can accept the quote
```

Short expiry windows reduce the risk of stale quotes but must be long enough for users to submit transactions on the source chain. 

Because the network is open, multiple providers may compete to fulfill the same request. Each quote defines the conditions under which a provider is willing to execute, enabling competitive pricing and redundancy across the system. Message validity is enforced through the Wormhole VAA and Guardian verification process, preventing providers from altering or forging the message and ensuring all executions remain trust-minimized.

Relay Providers may operate multiple wallets, each capable of performing execution or receiving payment. They can choose whether payments are collected per-wallet or directed to a central [`payeeAddress`](https://github.com/wormholelabs-xyz/example-messaging-executor/blob/main/evm/src/Executor.sol#L59){target=\_blank} defined by the Quoter.

Providers should provide a public API for integrators to track the status of the request such as: 

- Request creation.
- Added gas fees.
- Transaction executed.

> - Any issued refunds. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Request creation
- Added gas fees
- Transaction executes
- Any issued refunds
```
